Let's take a look at last non-direct click attribution.
This is the standard attribution model used in Google Analytics reporting.
Keep in mind, Google will give attribution precedence to the last identifiable source
medium campaign data for a user within the six-month campaign exploration window.
Google will always favor known campaign or source medium data over
unknown data and direct traffic will be the data without incoming source medium,
campaign data for the current session and also
with non-known campaign data within the expiration window.
If you want to see the direct sessions driven by preceding campaign activity,
there is a dimension called Direct Session in Google Analytics
reporting that will expose direct-session data very clearly.
Even though we have the ability to do multi-touch attribution in other places within GA,
most standard GA reporting does rely on this known last non-direct click model.
Let's take a look. Within the GA interface,
we're looking here at standard default channel grouping report
under acquisition, all traffic, channels.
Let's just take a look at this data for a moment and
make sure we understand what this data is telling us.
We see here are various channels that have driven traffic to the website.
Let's pick for example paid-search.
This would be your search engine marketing traffic and I'm seeing here that I have
7,579 sessions attributed to this channel for the period,
January 1, through March 31st.
What you may be thinking is, "Well this is great,
about 7500 people clicked on one of my generic paid search ads and came to the website".
This would be a reasonable assumption but it's not exactly how last
non-direct attribution works in GA and let's think about why.
Because of the six-month campaign window and because of
how last non-direct attribution works,
the 7500 session count includes both inbound sessions,
where the source media campaign data indicated it was paid-search but
also paid search receives attribution credit for
all subsequent sessions with the following rule;
that we are within the campaign exploration window
and there is no new campaign data present.
I've added here the secondary dimension called
direct-sessions and it's going to have two different potential values, yes or no.
What's helpful about this dimension in your acquisition reports is that,
now I can see a clear breakdown of the original sessions attributed to a channel and
also subsequent direct sessions that channel is receiving attribution credit for.
This is going to help us clarify what we were talking about earlier.
These direct-sessions are cases where a person had originally
come to the website with this paid-search campaign data,
and then they had subsequently visited the website without any new campaign data
present and within the campaign exploration window.
So, I can see that little over 5,400 of
those 7,500 sessions were direct sessions that received
attribution for paid search and about 2100 of those sessions were
original visits to the website with the campaign data that got classified as paid search.
It's an interesting way to break down the data.
The good news is that,
5,400 of those paid search sessions,
were not actually paid-clicks and you're getting a lot of traction and
residual benefit from the original clicks you paid for.